[TT-12871, TT-12550, TT-12865, DX-1678] Import draft of url matching (#5311)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/getting-started/key-concepts/url-matching.md

complex ruleset one can express.

---

## 2. Named Route Parameters

Named route parameters allow for dynamic segments in paths, where
specific parts can be variable and populated from the OpenAPI
definitions. These parameters are commonly used in APIs and dynamic
routing.

| **User Input**                          | **Converted Regular Expression**                             | **Description**                                      |
|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| `/users/{id}`                           | `^/users/(?P<v0>[^/]+)`                                      | Matches paths like `/users/123`, where `id` is dynamic. |
| `/static/{path}/assets/{file}`          | `^/static/(?P<v0>[^/]+)/assets/(?P<v1>[^/]+)`                | Matches paths like `/static/images/assets/logo.png`, where `path` and `file` are dynamic. |
| `/orders/{orderId}/items/{itemId}`      | `^/orders/(?P<v0>[^/]+)/items/(?P<v1>[^/]+)`                 | Matches paths like `/orders/456/items/789`, where `orderId` and `itemId` are dynamic. |

> > **Note:** The `{id}`, `{path}`, `{file}`, `{orderId}`, and `{itemId}` in the

Author: Why? this is markdown, shortcodes are a hugo feature

---
title: URL matching in Tyk
tags:
    - URL matching
    - Regular expressions
    - Granular access
    - Allow requests
    - Block requests
    - Mock responses
    - Secure access
    - Middleware
    - Routing
description: Overview of URL matching with the Tyk Gateway
date: "2024-08-30"
---

> This document explains how user inputs are converted into regular

Reviewer: I've added a note for this, thanks.

expressions for URL matching. The conversion is crucial for routing and
matching patterns within URLs in our system. We have grouped the patterns
into three logical sections: Basic Path Matching, Named Route Parameters,
and Advanced Pattern Matching. These sections highlight the transformation
process and the flexibility of named route parameters.

## Usage

URL matching is used in:

> - [Secure Your APIs by Method and Path](https://tyk.io/docs/security/security-policies/secure-apis-method-path/)

Reviewer 2: Replace URL links with relative URLs in this format so that links to content becomes associated with version in release branch instead of current live content:

For example:

```suggestion
- [Secure Your APIs by Method and Path]({{< ref "security/security-policies/secure-apis-method-path" >}})
```

Ensure that pages listed in usage section link to new url-matching page

- [Allow List Middleware](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/allow-list-middleware/)
- [Block List Middleware](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/block-list-middleware/)

> - [Middleware](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/)

Reviewer 2: Middleware is broken link

Reviewer 2: Does [URL Rewrites](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/url-rewrite-middleware/#pattern) use URL matching also?

Author: Removed/corrected middleware,
explained URL rewrites are regex only

URL matching supports:

- Prefix based matching, the default if URL starts with `/`
- Wildcard based matching, if the URL doesn't start with `/`
- Explicit based matching, if you add `$` at the end of your URLs
- Named parameter matching, if you use `/users/{id}`
- Custom regular expressions, inline and as named parameters
- Case sensitive matching

The behaviour of the URL matching is to match the request by prefix. For
a path like `/json`, it means that the URL matching will not match

> `/path/json`. However, `json` would. For more examples on how to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`/path/json`. However, `json` would match. For more examples on how to
```

would have caused undesired behaviour in older versions.

## 1. Basic Path Matching

This section covers straightforward path matching without any dynamic
parameters. These are useful for static routes where the path does not
change.

| **User Input** | **Converted Regular Expression** | **Description**                                                             |
|----------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `/users`       | `^/users`                        | Matches paths that start with `/users`.                                     |
| `users`        | `^.*users`                       | Matches any path containing the string `users`.                             |
| `/users$`      | `^/users$`                       | Matches request paths exactly equalling `/users`.                           |
| `/users/.*`    | `^/users/.*`                     | Matches any path that starts with `/users/` and can have anything after it. |

The input has full go regex (RE2) support. See
[pkg.go.dev/regexp](https://pkg.go.dev/regexp) for details.

> For a non-trivial example of regex pattern matching, one can configure a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a non-trivial example of regex pattern matching, one can configure a
complex expression to match [ULID](https://github.com/ulid/spec) values:
```

> **Note:** The `{id}`, `{path}`, `{file}`, `{orderId}`, and `{itemId}` in the
> user input correspond to dynamic path segments that are converted into named
> capturing groups in the regular expression (`(?P<v0>...)`, `(?P<v1>...)`).

---

## 3. Advanced Pattern Matching

This section demonstrates more advanced pattern matching, which includes
complex named route parameters, wildcard characters, and specific segment
constraints.

| **User Input**                               | **Converted Regular Expression**                  | **Description**                                                                                          |
|----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `/users/{id}/profile/{type:[a-zA-Z]+}`       | `^/users/(?P<v0>[^/]+)/profile/(?P<v1>[a-zA-Z]+)` | Matches paths where `id` is dynamic, and `type` only includes alphabetic characters.                     |

> | `/items/{itemID:[0-9]+}/details/{detail}`    | `^/items/(?P<v0>[0-9]+)/details/(?P<v1>[^/]+)`    | Matches paths like `/items/45/details/overview`, where `itemID` is a number and `detail` is dynamic.     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `/items/{itemID:[0-9]+}/details/{detail}`    | `^/items/(?P<v0>[0-9]+)/details/(?P<v1>[^/]+)`    | Matches paths like `/items/45/details/overview`, where `itemID` is a number and `details` is dynamic.     |
```

- [Request and Response Middleware]({{< ref"advanced-configuration/transform-traffic/" >}})

Some components, like [URL Rewriting]({{< ref"transform-traffic/url-rewriting/" >}}),
implement regular expression matching only, and do not apply path matching logic.

### Pattern Matching Overview

We've divided URL matching into three logical categories:

#### 1. **Basic Path Matching**

Basic path matching involves the direct comparison of a URL against
predefined patterns. The system can operate in either wildcard or
prefix/suffix modes (explained further below), allowing for flexible or
strict matches based on the desired configuration.

#### 2. **Named Route Parameters**

Named parameters within routes allow for dynamic URL matching. For
example, a route like `/users/{id}` would match any URL of the form
`/users/123`, where `123` is treated as a dynamic segment. This is
particularly useful for APIs where resource identifiers or user-specific
endpoints need to be handled. One can use `*` for an unnamed segment,
for example `/users/*/info`.

#### 3. **Advanced Pattern Matching**

Advanced matching supports more complex regular expressions, enabling

> developers to define granular rules that handle varied use cases like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
developers to define granular rules that handle varied use cases such as
```

versioning, optional parameters, and multiple route patterns.

### Configuration Parameters for Matching Behavior

> Several configuration flags are available to control URL matching

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tyk Gateway can be configured to perform URL matching in one of four modes:

- [wildcard match](#wildcard_match)
- [prefix match](#prefix_match)
- [suffix match](#suffix_match)
- [exact match](#exact_match)

```

> behavior. Here's a detailed explanation of how these flags influence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration can be set in the Gateway config file (`tyk.conf`) or using the equivalent environment variables, as described below.

**Tyk recommends the use of exact path matching for most use cases.**
```

> matching:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> #### `EnablePathPrefixMatching`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Prefix match
```

> By enabling this flag, URL matching switches from a wildcard mode to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By enabling the `EnablePathPrefixMatching` flag, Tyk will adopt the prefix matching method.
```

> prefix matching. This means that a URL pattern like `/json` is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that a URL pattern like `/json` will be
```

interpreted as a prefix, matching any URL that starts with `/json`. In
prefix mode, the system will perform matches as follows:

- regular expression `^/json` will match against:
  - `/listen-path/v4/json`
  - `/v4/json`
  - `/json` (match)

The logic behind prefix matching is that it prepends the start of string
symbol (`^`) if the URL begins with a `/`, to ensure that the URL begins
with the specified path. For example, `/json` would be evaluated as
`^/json`. If you're aiming for exact matches, you can combine this with
the suffix matching option (see below).

> #### `EnablePathSuffixMatching`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Suffix match
```

| `/orders/{orderId}/items/{itemId}` | `^/orders/([^/]+)/items/([^/]+)` |
| `/orders/{orderId}/items/{itemId}` | `^/orders/([^/]+)/items/([^/]+)` |

1. Matches paths like `/users/123`, where `id` is dynamic.
2. Matches paths like `/static/images/assets/logo.png`, where `path` and `file` are dynamic.
3. Matches paths like `/orders/456/items/789`, where `orderId` and `itemId` are dynamic.
4. Matches paths like `/orders/456/items/789`, where `orderId` and `itemId` are dynamic.

> **Note:** The `{id}`, `{path}`, `{file}`, `{orderId}`, and `{itemId}` in the
> user input correspond to dynamic path segments that are converted into capturing
> groups in the regular expression (`([^/]+)`).

To take advantage of unnamed parameters, you may replace any dynamic path
segment with a `*` (wildcard), or `{*}` in older versions.

| **User Input**       | **Converted Regular Expression** |
|----------------------|----------------------------------|
| `/users/*`           | `^/users/([^/]+)`                |
| `/static/*/assets/*` | `^/static/([^/]+)/assets/[^/]+)` |
| `/orders/*/items/*`  | `^/orders/([^/]+)/items/([^/]+)` |
| `/orders/*/items/*`  | `^/orders/([^/]+)/items/([^/]+)` |

---

> #### Advanced Pattern Matching

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Advanced pattern matching
```

Named parameters support specifying a regular expression to match. This
is in use with API listen paths and endpoints.

| **User Input**                               | **Converted Regular Expression**      |
|----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| `/users/{id}/profile/{type:[a-zA-Z]+}`       | `^/users/([^/]+)/profile/([a-zA-Z]+)` |
| `/items/{itemID:[0-9]+}/details/{detail}`    | `^/items/([0-9]+)/details/([^/]+)`    |
| `/products/{productId}/reviews/{rating:\d+}` | `^/products/([^/]+)/reviews/(\d+)`    |

> 1. Matches paths where `id` is dynamic, and `type` only includes alphabetic characters.

Reviewer: Again, can this go into the table? If not, we should add a number to the table entries - belt and braces approach to minimise risk of misunderstanding.

Author: Lets add the numbers, I've shrunk the table from 3 to 2 columns to not line-wrap in preview

2. Matches paths like `/items/45/details/overview`, where `itemID` is a number and `detail` is dynamic.
3. Matches paths like `/products/987/reviews/5`, where `productId` is dynamic and `rating` must be a digit.

> Patterns like these only work on listen paths and endpoints.

Reviewer: Is this specific only to this section of the page - or should it be emphasised earlier?

In URL matching for the purposes as described above, the regular
expressions will be as follows, matching any path segment, but not using
the regular expression defined in the named parameter.

| **User Input**                               | **Converted Regular Expression**     |
|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| `/users/{id}/profile/{type:[a-zA-Z]+}`       | `^/users/([^/]+)/profile/([^/]+)`    |
| `/items/{itemID:[0-9]+}/details/{detail}`    | `^/items/([^/]+)/details/([^/]+)`    |

> | `/products/{productId}/reviews/{rating:\d+}` | `^/products/([^/]+)/reviews/([^/]+)` |

Reviewer: Now I'm lost... :(

matching paths explicitly:

- `/listen-path/v4/json` - targeting API by listen path and version,
- `/v4/json` - only targeting the version, any API
- `/json` - only targeting the endpoint

When we consider that keys and policies may apply access rights over
multiple APIs, exact matching allows for fine-grained access policies
targeting individual APIs, versions or endpoints.

---

### Practical use cases for URL matching

Understanding these behaviors is essential in scenarios such as:

- **API Versioning**: You may want to allow different versions of an API, such as `/v1/users` and `/v2/users`, while still matching certain common paths or endpoints.
- **Middleware Control**: Middleware often relies on URL matching to determine when specific behaviors, such as rate limiting or authentication, should be applied.
- **Security Policies**: URL matching ensures that security policies, such as allow or block lists, are enforced for the correct paths without mistakenly leaving critical routes unprotected.

By fine-tuning these configurations, developers can create robust,
secure, and maintainable routing rules tailored to their specific use
cases.

> ### Migration notes

Author: ```suggestion
## Migration notes
```
